  SAM 3D: 3Dfy Anything in Images

     SAM 3D Team, Xingyu Chen, Fu-Jen Chu, Pierre Gleize, Kevin J Liang, Alexander Sax, Hao Tang,
     Weiyao Wang, Michelle Guo, Thibaut Hardin, Xiang Li, Aohan Lin, Jiawei Liu, Ziqi Ma, Anushka Sagar,
     Bowen Song, Xiaodong Wang, Jianing Yang, Bowen Zhang, Piotr Dollár, Georgia Gkioxari, Matt
     Feiszli§, Jitendra Malik§
     Meta Superintelligence Labs
     Core Contributor (Alphabetical, Equal Contribution), Intern, Project Lead, §Equal Contribution

     We present SAM 3D, a generative model for visually grounded 3D object reconstruction, predicting
     geometry, texture, and layout from a single image. SAM 3D excels in natural images, where occlusion
     and scene clutter are common and visual recognition cues from context play a larger role. We achieve
     this with a human- and model-in-the-loop pipeline for annotating object shape, texture, and pose,
     providing visually grounded 3D reconstruction data at unprecedented scale. We learn from this data
     in a modern, multi-stage training framework that combines synthetic pretraining with real-world
     alignment, breaking the 3D "data barrier". We obtain significant gains over recent work, with at
     least a 5 : 1 win rate in human preference tests on real-world objects and scenes. We will release our
     code and model weights, an online demo, and a new challenging benchmark for in-the-wild 3D object
     reconstruction.

     Demo: https://www.aidemos.meta.com/segment-anything/editor/convert-image-to-3d
     Code: https://github.com/facebookresearch/sam-3d-objects
     Website: https://ai.meta.com/sam3d

Figure 1 SAM 3D converts a single image into a composable 3D scene made of individual objects. Our method predicts
per-object geometry, texture, and layout, enabling full scene reconstruction. Bottom: high-quality 3D assets recovered
for each object.

1 Introduction

In this paper (see Figure 1) we present SAM 3D, a generative neural network for 3D reconstruction from
a single image. The model can reconstruct 3D shape and texture for any object, as well as its layout with
respect to the camera, even in complex scenes with significant clutter and occlusion. As the reconstruction
is of full 3D shape, not just of the visible 2.5D surface, one can then re-render the object from any desired
viewpoint.
Computer vision has traditionally focused on multi-view geometry as providing the primary signal for 3D
shape. However psychologists (and artists before them) have long known that humans can perceive depth and

                                                                      1
shape from a single image, e.g. Koenderink et al. (1992) demonstrated this elegantly by showing that humans
can estimate surface normals at probe points on an object's image, which can then be integrated to a full
surface. In psychology textbooks these single image cues to 3D shape are called "pictorial cues", and include
information such as in shading and texture patterns, but also recognition - the "familiar object" cue. In
computer vision, this line of research dates back to Roberts (1963), who showed that once an image pattern was
recognized as a known object, its 3D shape and pose could be recovered. The central insight is that recognition
enables 3D reconstruction, an idea that has since resurfaced in different technical instantiations (Debevec
et al., 2023; Cashman and Fitzgibbon, 2012; Kar et al., 2015; Gkioxari et al., 2019; Xiang et al., 2025). Note
that this permits generalization to novel objects, because even if a specific object has not been seen before, it
is made up of parts seen before.

A fundamental challenge for learning such models is the lack of data: specifically, natural images paired with
3D ground truth are difficult to obtain at scale. Recent work (Yang et al., 2024b; Xiang et al., 2025) has
shown strong reconstruction from single images. However, these models are trained on isolated objects and
struggle with objects in natural scenes, where they may be distant or heavily occluded. To add such images
to the training set, we need to find a way to associate specific objects in such images with 3D shape models,
acknowledging that generalist human annotators find it hard to do so (unlike, say, attaching a label like "cat"
or marking its boundary). Two insights made this possible:

    · We can create synthetic scenes where 3D object models are rendered and pasted into images (inspired
       by Dosovitskiy et al. (2015)).

    · While humans can't easily generate 3D shape models for objects, they can select the likely best 3D
       model from a set of proffered choices and align its pose to the image (or declare that none of the choices
       is good).

We design a training pipeline and data engine by adapting modern, multistage training recipes pioneered
by LLMs (Minaee et al., 2025; Mo et al., 2025). As in recent works, we first train on a large collection of
rendered synthetic objects. This is supervised pretraining: our model learns a rich vocabulary for object
shape and texture, preparing it for real-world reconstruction. Next is mid-training with semi-synthetic data
produced by pasting rendered models into natural images. Finally, post-training adapts the model to real
images, using both a novel model-in-the-loop (MITL) pipeline and human 3D artists, and aligns it to human
preference. We find that synthetic pretraining generalizes, given adequate post-training on natural images.

Our post-training data, obtained from our MITL data pipeline, is key to obtaining good performance in
natural images. Generalist human annotators aren't capable of producing 3D shape ground truth; hence
our annotators select and align 3D models to objects in images from the output of modules ­ computational
and retrieval-based ­ that produce multiple initial 3D shape proposals. Human annotators select from these
proposals, or route them to human artists for a subset of hard instances. The vetted annotations feed back
into model training, and the improved model is reintegrated into the data engine to further boost annotation
quality. This virtuous cycle steadily improves the quality of 3D annotations, labeling rates, and model
performance.

Due to the lack of prior benchmarks for real-world 3D reconstruction of object shape and layout, we propose
a new evaluation set of 1, 000 image and 3D pairs: SAM 3D Artist Objects (SA-3DAO). The objects in our
benchmark range from churches, ski lifts, and large structures to animals, everyday household items, and rare
objects, and are paired with the real-world images in which they naturally appear. Professional 3D artists
create 3D shapes from the input image, representing an expert human upper bound for visually grounded
3D reconstruction. We hope that contributing such an evaluation benchmark helps accelerate subsequent
research iteration of real-world 3D reconstruction models.

We summarize our contributions as follows:

    · We introduce SAM 3D, a new foundation model for 3D that predicts object shape, texture, and pose
       from a single image. By releasing code, model weights, and a demo, we hope to stimulate further
       advancements in 3D reconstruction and downstream applications of 3D.

    · We build a MITL pipeline for annotating shape, texture, and pose data, providing visually grounded 3D
       reconstruction data at unprecedented scale.

                                                                      2
Figure 2 SAM 3D architecture. (top) SAM 3D first predicts coarse shape and layout with the Geometry model; (right)
the mixture of transformers architecture apply a two-stream approach with information sharing in the multi-modal
self-attention layer. (bottom) The voxels predicted by the Geometry model are passed to the Texture & Refinement
model, which adds higher resolution detail and textures.

    · We exploit this data via LLM-style pretraining and post-training in a novel framework for 3D reconstruc-
       tion, combining synthetic pretraining with real-world alignment to overcome the orders of magnitude
       data gap between 3D and domains such as text, images, or video.

    · We release a challenging benchmark for real-world 3D object reconstruction, SA-3DAO. Experiments
       show SAM 3D's significant gains via metrics and large-scale human preference.

2 The SAM 3D Model

2.1 Problem Formulation
The act of taking a photograph maps a 3D object to a set of 2D pixels, specified by a mask M in an image
I. We seek to invert this map. Let the object have shape S, texture T , and rotation, translation and scale
(R, t, s) in camera coordinates. Since the 3D to 2D map is lossy, we model the reconstruction problem as a
conditional distribution p(S, T, R, t, s|I, M ). Our goal is to train a generative model q(S, T, R, t, s|I, M ) that
approximates p as closely as possible.

2.2 Architecture
We build upon recent SOTA two-stage latent flow matching architectures (Xiang et al., 2025). SAM 3D
first jointly predicts object pose and coarse shape, then refines the shapes by integrating pictorial cues
(see Figure 2). Unlike Xiang et al. (2025) that reconstructs isolated objects, SAM 3D predicts object layout,
creating coherent multi-object scenes.

Input encoding. We use DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023) as an encoder to extract features from two pairs of
images, resulting in 4 sets of conditioning tokens:

    · Cropped object: We encode the cropped image I by mask M and its corresponding cropped binary mask,
       providing a focused, high-resolution view of the object.

    · Full image: We encode the full image I and its full image binary mask, providing global scene context
       and recognition cues absent from the cropped view.

Optionally, the model supports conditioning on a coarse scene point map, P obtained via hardware sensors
(e.g., LiDAR on an iPhone), or monocular depth estimation (Yang et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2025a), enabling
SAM 3D to integrate with other pipelines.

                                                                       3
